House Greyjoy of Pyke is a noble house from the Iron Islands. They have held dominion over the Iron Islands since the War of Conquest. They make their seat at a castle called Pyke on the island of Pyke. Their sigil is a golden kraken on a black field. Their house words are We Do Not Sow. The head of the house at the start of the novels is Lord Balon Greyjoy. The head of the house traditionally styles themselves as the Lord Reaper of Pyke.

House Greyjoy claim their descent from the Grey King, a legendary King of the Iron Islands from the Age of Heroes.

In the era where the Ironborn chose their kings through a Kingsmoot, only House Greyiron and House Goodbrother had more chosen than the Greyjoys. The Greyjoys were amongst the houses that intermarried with Andals after the Andal Invasion of the Iron Islands.

After the destruction of House Hoare during the War of Conquest, the Iron Islands fell into chaotic squabbling, causing King Aegon I Targaryen to invade. He then let them choose their new Lord Paramount, and they chose Lord Vickon Greyjoy.

At the start of the Dance of the Dragons, Dalton Greyjoy, the Lord Reaper of Pyke, was offered the position of Master of Ships on the Small council of King Aegon II Targaryen, replacing Ser Tyland Lannister. Dalton's response was to sack Lannisport and raid the western coast of Westeros, taking control of Kayce and Faircastle on Fair Isle. He defied the Iron Throne for two years before being murdered in his sleep in Faircastle.

Lord Dagon Greyjoy later reaved on the western coast of the continent, raiding the town of Little Dosk. A combined force of Lord Beron Stark and House Lannister gathered against him, and Dagon proved unable to resist the rule of House Targaryen.

Lord Quellon Greyjoy attempted to reintegrate the Ironborn into the mainland houses. He was, however, killed late on during Robert's Rebellion, and his son and heir, Balon, objected to his father's reforms, and built the Iron Fleet. He then went into open rebellion against King Robert I Baratheon. There were some early successes, such as the buring of the Lannister fleet, but the Iron Fleet was defeated in the Battle of Fair Isle, Balon's eldest son, Rodrik Greyjoy, was killed below the walls of Seagard, and the mainland forces started to invade the islands. During the Siege of Pyke Balon's second son, Maron Greyjoy, was killed. His third and youngest son, Theon Greyjoy, was taken as a ward of Lord Eddard Stark after the end of the war.

With Theon away from Pyke, Balon raised his only daughter, Asha Greyjoy, as his heir. Balon exiled his brother, Euron, for raping the third wife of another brother, Victarion. Victarion then had to kill his wife. Euron has travelled the world, raiding and pillaging, and claims to have visited the ruins of Valyria. Another brother, Aeron, is changed by his experiences and converts to becoming a Drowned Man.